Soprano Ukulele

the different sizes of ukuleles
Soprano, Concert, Tenor, Baritone
(from smallest to largest)

The soprano ukulele is also known as the standard ukulele because it is the closest in size to the original ukuleles made in Hawaii in the late 1800's. The soprano ukulele is the most well-known ukulele, and the vast majority of music stores will stock them. The soprano uke is usually around 21 inches long, and has only 12-15 frets depending on model. This gives it the smallest playing range of all of the ukulele types, with a twelve-fret model having a range of only twenty-two half-tones (C4-A5). The soprano ukulele is favored as a learner instrument for children because of its small size and thus the small distance between frets. This makes chord positions much easier for small hands to reach than compared with a child-sized guitar. The size of the soprano ukulele also makes it the perfect travelling companion for musicians who like to take to the road. However, the small soprano can also be harder to play for people with larger hands, who may struggle to navigate around such a condensed fretboard.

The soprano ukulele is standard-tuned to the re-entrant tuning of G4-C4-E4-A4. Most commonly, the soprano ukulele is outfitted with nylon polymer strings, which help to give the soprano uke the classic up-beat and harshly thin timbre that it is known for. The soprano ukulele is a common ukulele to start with because there are plenty of relatively low-cost and beginner-friendly models on the market at the moment. There is also an abundance of free online learning resources that cover material specifically for beginner soprano ukulele players, as well as great tools for beginner players like our own Ukulele Tuner and Ukulele Tuning App. Intermediate and advanced players are well-catered for too, so it is possible to upskill on the soprano ukulele without spending much money on lessons, music or other materials.

The Soprano is sometimes tuned a step higher in order to maintain a more traditional sound. To learn more about the tuning of the ukulele, check out our How to Tune the Ukulele article.

Concert Ukulele

The concert ukulele is the very similarly constructed big sister of the soprano ukulele. The concert uke therefore maintains many of the same stylistic features as the soprano ukulele, and sounds much more similar to the soprano than to the tenor or the baritone ukulele. The concert ukulele is usually around 23 inches long; with a slightly bigger body than the soprano, which produces a somewhat richer, warmer tone. The concert uke usually has somewhere between 15 and 20 frets, depending on model. This gives the concert an extended playing range over the soprano ukulele, making it a preferable choice for ukulele soloists. The longer body of the concert means that the frets (especially those near the nut, which are more commonly played), are spaced further apart - and so the concert ukulele is considered to be easier to navigate for people with slightly larger hands. The extra room on the concert ukulele, along with its extended range, allows players to perform more technical skills on the uke while still maintaining the classic 'soprano-like' sound of the original Hawaiian ukulele.

The concert ukulele is standard-tuned to the same re-entrant tuning in the same octave as the soprano (G4, C4, E3, and A4). Like the soprano, the concert uke is also most commonly outfitted with nylon polymer strings, which maintains the continuity of sound between these two types of ukulele. The concert comes in as the second least-expensive model to pick up from a music store, with most low to mid-range models of concert ukulele being similarly priced as low to mid-range sopranos. As the tuning of the soprano and the concert are the same, the two tend to share learning resources; however there is also music especially for the concert which takes advantage of the extended range of this type of ukulele. Tools such as our Ukulele Tuner and Ukulele Tuning App work just as well with concert ukuleles as they do with sopranos!

The concert ukulele is more suited to performing advanced ukulele playing techniques, like the ones mentioned in our How to Play the Ukulele article.

Tenor Ukulele

The tenor ukulele is like the big brother of the soprano, being slightly deeper in tone and bigger than both the soprano and the concert ukuleles. The tenor ukulele is stocked in some music stores; however others may have to order the tenor in for you as it is not as popular as either the soprano or the concert. The tenor ukulele is usually around 26 inches long, has between 15-25 frets, and has a significantly larger body than the soprano and the concert. While the playing range of the tenor is very similar (if not the same, in some cases) as that of a concert ukulele, the tone that the larger body of the tenor produces makes it very different in sound quality to the concert and the soprano. The tenor is sometimes snubbed for not having the same 'ukuleleish' sound or feel as a soprano; however it has been embraced by many ukulele performers because of its increased projection and warm tone, which make the tenor perfect for solo acoustic performances. The frets on the tenor are spaced further apart than on the soprano and concert, making it slightly harder to play (or easier to play - depending on the size of your hands). If you are a beginner player, you will usually be advised to start on the concert or the soprano ukulele, however the tenor does suit some players much better, so it is best to pick up a tenor and try it yourself before you decide - regardless of the advice of others.

The tenor ukulele has two types of standard tuning, however in order to switch from one type to the other you will need to change the strings (or at least the G-string) on your ukulele. The two types of standard tuning for the tenor ukulele include the 'normal' re-entrant G4-C4-E4-A4 tuning, and the octave-lower G-string linear tuning of G3-C4-E4-A4. The linear tuning of the tenor ukulele increases the range of the instrument and creates a more full-bodied sound, whereas the normal re-entrant tuning keeps more of the characteristic ukulele flavor. Both high and low-G tunings have their advantages, so it is a good idea to identify what kind of tuning would suit your playing goals and style best before you decide on one. Tenor ukuleles are most commonly strung with nylon polymer strings, or with a mix of nylon polymer and metal wound strings. The usages of the two basically boil down to personal preference, with some preferring the more traditional sound made by the nylons to the warmer, metal-wound strings. Tenors are more expensive than their soprano and concert counterparts, due to their larger design. Learning resources can be found for the tenor freely online, however not in quite the same abundance if using linear tuning.

Check out our How to Tune the Ukulele article to learn more about how the Tenor is tuned.

Baritone Ukulele

The baritone ukulele is often viewed as being more like a guitar than a ukulele as not only is it tuned using linear tuning, but its strings are tuned the same as the top four strings of the guitar. The baritone ukulele is usually around 30 inches in length and has upwards of 18 frets, depending on model. The linear tuning gives the baritone the greatest range of any of the ukulele types. It is a much bigger instrument than the soprano, tenor or concert, and is often used by guitarists who wish to learn the ukulele, or by ukulele players who would eventually like to progress on to playing the guitar.

The baritone ukulele is standard-tuned to D3-G3-B3-E4, and therefore requires completely different music and chord charts from the tenor, concert and soprano ukuleles (although the chord shapes will be the same on the baritone ukulele, the chord names will be different). The baritone ukulele can be strung with either nylon polymer strings or a combination of nylon polymers and metal wound strings, depending on personal preference. A metal wound string will give a warmer tone to the baritone uke, whereas nylon polymer strings will make the baritone sound more 'ukuleleish'. The baritone ukulele is the most expensive ukulele to buy, because of its larger body. Also, there aren't as many free learning resources covering how to play the baritone ukulele as opposed to what is available for the tenor, concert and soprano, making it a less-desirable starter instrument for many who look at playing the ukulele - despite its bridging ability between the ukulele and the guitar. Baritone ukuleles are often used by blues players, and they tend to suit male singers better than the high soprano or concert in most cases.
